Pathogenesis - Some responses to reviewer 2 (#883)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/07.pathogenesis.md

#### Pathogenic Mechanisms of Coronaviruses

> While, like most viruses, it is possible that SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 can enter cells through endocytosis, coronaviruses are also able to target cells for entry through fusion with the plasma membrane [@doi:10.1038/cr.2008.15; @doi:10.1146/annurev-biochem-060208-104626], a process conserved among coronaviruses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While, like most viruses, it is possible that SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 can enter cells through endocytosis,  a process conserved among coronaviruses enables them to target cells for entry through fusion with the plasma membrane [@doi:10.1038/cr.2008.15; @doi:10.1146/annurev-biochem-060208-104626].
```
I was thinking this might be what the reviewer meant, but yours could also be! I just figured I'd put it here to compare our thoughts!

Author: As I read back their comment, they say previous sentence, so I think you are correct.

However, serious complications and, in rare cases, deaths have occurred [@doi:10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100433].
Of particular interest, children have occasionally experienced a serious inflammatory syndrome, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), following COVID-19 infection.
This syndrome is similar in some respects to Kawasaki disease, including Kawasaki disease shock syndrome [@doi:10.1093/jpids/piaa069; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.10369; @doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2020.05.117] and is thought to be a distinct clinical manifestation of SARS-CoV-2 due to its distinct cytokine profile and the presence of burr cells in peripheral blood smears [@doi:10.1172/JCI140970; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.016].
MIS-C has been associated with heart failure in some cases [@doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048360].
One case study [@doi:10/gg4sd6] described an adult who appeared to show symptoms similar to MIS-C after exposure to COVID-19, but cautioned against broad conclusions; a second possible adult case has also been reported [@doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2020.06.053].
The presentation of SARS-CoV-2 infection is therefore likely to be largely distinct between adult and pediatric populations.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, not all cases of severe COVID-19 in children are characterizable as MIS-C.
A recent study [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.2091] described demographic and clinical variables associated with MIS-C in comparison with non-MIS-C severe acute COVID-19 in young people in the United States.

```

In the hosts where SARS-CoV-2 was able to replicate efficiently, differential expression analysis revealed that the transcriptional response was significantly different from the response to all of the other viruses tested.
A unique pro-inflammatory cytokine signature associated with SARS-CoV-2 was present in cells exposed to both high and low doses of the virus, with the cytokines IL-6 and IL1RA uniquely elevated in response to SARS-CoV-2 relative to other viruses.
However, the A549-ACE2 cells showed significant IFN-I or IFN-III expression when exposed to high, but not low, doses of SARS-CoV-2.

> This finding suggests that IFN induction is dependent on the of exposure.

Author: ```suggestion
This finding suggests that IFN induction is dependent on the magnitude of exposure.
```

> This finding suggests that IFN induction is dependent on the of exposure.

Author: ```suggestion
This finding suggests that IFN induction is dependent on the extent of exposure.
```

Author: My bad, deleted wrong one.

Many current efforts to model R~t~ have also led to tools that assist the visualization of estimates in real time or over recent intervals [@url:https://epiforecasts.io/covid; @url:https://rt.live].
These are valuable resources, yet it is also important to note that the estimates arise from models containing many assumptions and are dependent on the quality of the data they use, which varies widely by region.

> ### Molecular Signatures, Transmission, and Variants of Concern

Author: This is just a suggestion rather than making an entirely new section, also shorten as you see fit

Similar mutations observed in several patients may indicate that the patients belong to the same transmission group.
The tracking of SARS-CoV-2 mutations is recognized as an essential tool for controlling future outbreaks and tracing the path of the spread of SARS-CoV-2.
Efforts vary widely by country: the UK has coordinated a national database of viral genomes [@doi:10/d5mg]; no such coordination has been achieved in the USA.
Several studies used phylogenetic analysis to determine the source of local COVID-19 outbreaks in Connecticut (USA), [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.021], the New York City area (USA) [@doi:10.1126/science.abc1917], and Iceland [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2006100].
There is an ongoing effort to collect SARS-CoV-2 genomes throughout the COVID-19 outbreak, and as of January 18, 2021 more than 381,000 genome sequences have been collected from patients.<!-- TODO: consider auto-updating this -->
The sequencing data can be found at GISAID [@https://www.gisaid.org/], NCBI [@https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sars-cov-2/], and COVID-19 data portal [@https://www.covid19dataportal.org/].

> While the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 variants are discussed elsewhere within this special issue [], some of these variants may be associated with increased transmission of SARS-CoV-2. 

Author: Reference to evolution manuscript required.

Reviewer: @agitter this seems great to me. I looked through that one today and I'm optimistic we can get it on arXiv soon-ish, although hard to tell exactly how things will line up with resubmission here.

> For example, the coordinated sequencing efforts in the U.K. were instrumental in detecting B.1.1.7/VOC 202012/01, a variant of concern (VOC) that is associated with approximately 50% increased transmission with an estimated R0 of 1.4 due to alterations of the spike protein as a result of genetic mutations [@url:https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/955239/NERVTAG_paper_on_variant_of_concern__VOC__B.1.1.7.pdf; @doi:10.1101/2020.12.24.20248822; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.01.044].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, coordinated sequencing efforts of SARS-CoV-2 genomes in the U.K. were instrumental in detecting B.1.1.7/VOC 202012/01, a variant of concern (VOC) that, with an estimated R~0~ of 1.4, is associated with approximately 50% increased transmission due to genetic mutations in the _Spike_ gene that modify the Spike protein [@url:https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/955239/NERVTAG_paper_on_variant_of_concern__VOC__B.1.1.7.pdf; @doi:10.1101/2020.12.24.20248822; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.01.044].<!--TO DO: What is the molecular rationale for why this is more virulent?-->
```
I think we mention the UK sequencing efforts in the evolution paper but not here, so I'm suggesting modifying the start of this sentence a bit -- but I could be mistaken about that.
Adding a comment that it would be good to try to take this to the next level pathogenesis-wise, but I don't want to hold up your PR any longer!

Author: I think you are right. I agree re pathogenesis, a lot of new papers out. @agitter set up an issue this week for one that we may want to consider citing here, but that we should definitely cite in the evolution paper.

> Since spreading to at least 93 other countries [@url:https://cov-lineages.org/global_report_B.1.1.7.html], other studies investigating its transmission have occured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This variant has now spread to at least 93 other countries [@url:https://cov-lineages.org/global_report_B.1.1.7.html], and other studies investigating its transmission have occurred.
```

> In the U.S. it was estimated that B.1.1.7 had an increased transmission of 35-45% versus the common SARS-CoV-2 variants at the time between December 2020 and January 2021, and B.1.1.7 is on its way to become the dominant SARS-CoV-2 variant in the U.S. [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.06.21251159].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the U.S. between December 2020 and January 2021, it was estimated that B.1.1.7 had an increased transmission of 35-45% relative to common SARS-CoV-2 variants at the time, and B.1.1.7 is now on its way to becoming the dominant SARS-CoV-2 variant in the U.S. [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.06.21251159].
```

> Notably, the latest analyses in the U.K. reports that there may be an increased risk of disease severity associated with B.1.1.7 [@url:https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nervtag-paper-on-covid-19-variant-of-concern-b117] and potentially a 35% increased risk of death [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.01.21250959] versus common variants of SARS-CoV-2. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notably, the latest analyses in the U.K. reports that there may also be an increased risk of disease severity associated with B.1.1.7 [@url:https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nervtag-paper-on-covid-19-variant-of-concern-b117] and potentially a 35% increased risk of death [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.01.21250959] compared to other common variants of SARS-CoV-2. 
```

However, further studies are required to confirm these associations. 

> Other variants have been identified including the P.1 lineage associated with outbreaks in Brazil and B.1.351 a variant first identified in South Africa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other variants meriting further investigation have also been identified worldwide, including the P.1 lineage associated with outbreaks in Brazil and the B.1.351 variant first identified in South Africa.
```
Not sure if my phrasing of not-VOC-but-we're-worried makes sense!

Author: Haha it does, at this stage they are all colloquially VOCs

Currently, it is not known whether these lineages have increased transmissibility. 
However, the P.1. lineage and the B.1.351 variant do share similar independently acquired mutations with B.1.1.7 such as N501Y [@doi:10.1101/2020.12.14.422555; @url:https://cov-lineages.org/global_report_B.1.351.html].

> Indeed, these novel variants are being investigated for their potential resistance to vaccines and antibody treatments such as Bamlanivimab, but to date it seems that these agents are still effective, albeit with reduced efficacy in the case of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.02.428884]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, these novel variants are being investigated for potential resistance to vaccines and antibody treatments such as Bamlanivimab, but to date it seems that these agents are still effective, albeit with reduced efficacy in the case of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.02.428884]. 
```

> As a consequence of our reliance on targeting the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein, increased surveillance is required to rapidly identify and prevent the spread of novel SARS-CoV-2 variants with alterations to the Spike protein.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a consequence of reliance on targeting the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein for many therapeutic and prophylactic strategies, increased surveillance is required to rapidly identify and prevent the spread of novel SARS-CoV-2 variants with alterations to the Spike protein.
```

Epithelial cells have also emerged as the major cellular target of the virus, contextualizing the respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms that are frequently observed in COVID-19.
Many of the mechanisms that facilitate the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 are currently under consideration as possible targets for the treatment or prevention of COVID-19.<!-- TODO: [cite therapeutics] -->
Research in other viruses also provides a foundation for understanding the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among people and can therefore inform efforts to control the virus's spread.

> The to which aerosol and fomite transmission contribute to the spread of SARS-CoV-2 remains a question: in general, much like SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, this virus seems to be spread primarily by droplet transmission.

Author: ```suggestion
The extent to which aerosol and fomite transmission contribute to the spread of SARS-CoV-2 remains a question: in general, much like SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, this virus seems to be spread primarily by droplet transmission.
```
